march 12th
this morning like a bolt from the blue
we learned joel biden's grand
strategy not just for the politics
of southeast asia not just for his
diplomatic relations with
india and china really
his strategy to redraw the map
of the world nobody thought he had it in
him
everyone imagined joe biden was going to
be a status quo player
who would change nothing or would revert
from the um
dangerous disastrous and unpredictable
policies of donald trump
to the more stalwart
predictable boring policies of
barack obama that is not the case at all
um joe biden
is probably going to be remembered like
richard nixon
as someone who had bold shocking new
policies
in the uh foreign relations department
that changed forever
the history of the world i cannot
emphasize
enough from a chinese perspective
joe biden's declaration this morning is
as shocking
as the beginning of world war iv
and wang yi china's main
foreign relations minister the guy you
always see on the news
and the guy who flies around the world
talking face to face with world leaders
on china's behalf he's really
the foreign minister for china
wang yi has been on the phone with a
long series
of countries in europe austria
switzerland and so on
trying to reinforce the notion
that the european union is going to
continue
to be china's trading partner and
implicitly
their political partner as china now
seems will be cut off
not just in the united states but from
most of the rest of the world
through kind of unbelievably powerful
partnership between india
australia japan and the united states
the so-called
quadrilateral alliance that is openly
saying
they are going to form a worldwide
conspiracy
that is pro-democracy and
anti-dictatorship and very specifically
anti-china right this is a big
change it's important
that i take a moment now to argue
against my own position
what if this fizzles out what if it
comes to nothing what if it's indecisive
what if it doesn't really matter okay
barack obama dramatically announced his
pivot to asia policy and that in some
ways anticipated what's happening today
but it completely fizzled out nothing
decisive happened now
joe biden lived through all that joe
biden watched that unfold
and you could look at the current
situation say oh well
maybe joe biden is going to do the same
thing obama did
he's going to make this announcement of
a bold new policy on china
and then nothing's going to happen
that's that's what
obama did there is every indication
today
that joe biden's attitude is not that he
wants to emulate
or imitate the failures of obama
but that he has learned from that
experience and he is very decisively
moving to do something quite different
from what obama ever did and indeed
quite different from what
donald trump ever did ultimately i mean
trump's china policy
it was incoherent it was unpredictable
from one month to the next
it was a vaguely anti-china policy
primarily economic in terms of trade and
trying to
balance uh america's imports and exports
and so there's
different kind of impulses there um
but you know this is joe biden taking a
decisive step
that nobody in the united states has
taken certainly not since
richard nixon set down the basis for
the economic and political partnership
between the united states and china what
was called
the strategic triangle sometimes
referred to as the iron triangle now
i'm gonna sneeze
very broadly speaking it's important to
remember
american foreign policy it's partly
rational
but it's in large part sentimental
why was bill clinton pro china
in large part because the united states
of america had been pro china
since nixon if america's alliance with
china
made sense under richard nixon it
certainly didn't make
any sense at all under bill clinton
right i mean fundamentally
what nixon did was make an alliance with
china
against the russians and at that time
the situation between
china and russia was not a cold war it
was a hot war
the breakdown of the china-russia
alliance because formerly under
communism of course they had been allies
and it got worse and worse and worse to
the point where there was a massive
russian army
on the mongolian chinese border
ready to invade china at all times
several
high-profile leaders in the chinese
communist party
defected to russia about chinese leaders
running away to russia and then once
they're in russia publishing
lectures denouncing the communist
government of china
the whole government of mongolia who
were on the russian side
constantly denouncing the government of
china as not being a legitimate congress
government
it was a hot war okay it was not a cold
war
what happened between uh russia and
china
and the chinese decided to get new
alliance with the americans
and the americans decided to get the
lines of china against the russians and
that was when
mao zedong was still alive okay now
that's as surreal as that may have been
right
if it made sense at that moment when
nixon
was the president united states and when
mao zedong was leader of china
then the berlin wall falls russia stops
being a communist
country right bill clinton becomes the
president says
what sense what sense does america's
policy on china make what bill clinton
is
it makes no sense at all but it
continued right
so american foreign policy it's partly
rational self-interest
you know there's a lot of sentiment
there an american sentiment
in foreign policy it endures for decades
after the original rationality created
the alliance really briefly another
example of that i would say is the
united states and their relationship to
turkey
for decades and decades like anyone
alive now
as long as you can remember when did it
make sense
the relationship between the united
states and turkey well
back when kennedy was the president of
the united states it seemed to make a
lot of sense
right it sure seemed to make sense uh
you know
after the bay of pigs and the cuban
missile crisis
and kennedy is in power in the united
states it seemed then that america
really needed this alliance with turkey
again against
russia uh to simplify under those cold
war conditions
but then as the decades go by what what
what sense does it doesn't really make
any sense
so you know in economics you talk about
a leading indicator and a lagging
indicator
america these policies don't change
rapidly they change
very very slowly now the big news today
the quadrilateral alliance that america
is entering into
a strategic partnership frankly an
anti-china conspiracy
with japan
india and australia
that idea has been bandied about since
abe shinzo
was prime minister of japan the first
time
way back in 2007. uh
for the most part since 2007 it wasn't a
quadrilateral alliance the united states
of america was interested
but you were mostly looking at
agreements between three countries just
australia japan and india
and even then it has sort of ebbed and
flowed for one thing
uh abbey shinzo was not continuously
prime minister of japan
he left and came back and another prime
minister came and went was
was prime minister rudd of australia
rudd was a basically a pro-china leader
of australia
so australia's optimism and pessimism
about china
ebbed and flowed also but fundamentally
at least
on the level of naval cooperation
worrying about
you know control of the oceans there was
this
three-way partnership with the united
states
taking a very passive very cagey very
detached
role and that certainly continued down
to and including
barack obama in the so-called pivot to
asia
it deserves to be asked what was obama's
perspective
on the so-called quadrilateral alliance
against china
well i guess we'll never know and
probably nobody cares
but obama did nothing decisive one way
or the other on this
but it has sort of been
a potential or actual anti-china
alliance that has existed on paper
now in terms of how terrifying it is for
china
ask yourself this if biden is now
serious
and they move ahead with this
quadrilateral alliance
what is thailand going to do
what is mongolia going to do
how about the philippines
how about malaysia okay there were a
whole lot of other
potential political partners who will be
more or less eager to jump on a
pro-american anti-china bandwagon
once this bad wagon gets rolling and
that is terrifying
to china and the quadrilateral alliance
itself to begin with
is terrifying but then what this is
going to do
for china's position in the whole of
asia
right is much much more threatening
now the necessary background of this
why didn't this happen earlier right one
part has already been mentioned
that actually the united states and
china had an alliance dating back to
nixon the less said about that the
better i think for the purposes of this
video the other is the history of
america's war
in afghanistan the most important
and most ignored aspect of america's war
in afghanistan
was their partnership with pakistan a
partnership that was
in brief a disaster for the united
states of america it was incredibly
stupid it was incredibly short-sighted
it's the wrong approach
to the war in afghanistan i mean my
point being here
whether or not you would support america
conquering afghanistan if you traveled
back in time
to the distant year of 2001 whether or
not you thought that was a good idea in
2001 2002 2003
once you decide that you do want to
conquer afghanistan
how are you going to do it who are going
to be your partners who are going to be
your enemies
and the united states decide to enter
into a profound
and intimate cooperation with pakistan
and pakistan's
secret service intelligence services
intelligence agency however you want to
put it
right and it turns out that pakistan had
its own
agenda in afghanistan it turns out that
in some ways pakistan's interests in
afghanistan were compatible with those
united states america but in some ways
they were diametrically opposed they
were
totally incompatible and it was really
ridiculous for the united states of
america to become dependent on
pakistan for its central asian policy
because let's face it afghanistan isn't
isolated it's part of central asia i
mean
you have to have a strategy for that
whole part of the world how you're going
to stabilize how you're going to
normalize how are you going to modernize
afghanistan you're going to bring
afghanistan into the modern world and
then
as a consequence of that islam will
become
more moderate and more modern within
afghanistan in as much as they cease to
be
an isolated pariah state and become
connected to the outside world
so um in as much as
the united states of america was allied
with and in a very tight
military partnership with pakistan the
united states
had to be the enemy of india
okay there was nothing positive
possible for the united states and india
jointly so long as
the americans and pakistanis were in
this alliance and now today
again you don't have to have access to
secret cia documents like
in terms of the information that's
publicly available today it's very easy
to look back on america's alliance of
pakistan and just totally regret it
so this was the wrong george w bush was
no genius what can i tell you
whatever area whatever area of
intellectual strength
um george w bush had it wasn't
central asian politics it wasn't south
asian politics i mean it's
worth pausing to consider just how
little expertise
and just how little interest anybody in
the united states of america has
in the politics of that part of the
world um
even at the elite levels of government
even at the levels of people who
have phds from princeton university
how many people at princeton university
have anything intelligent to say
about the history of america's political
relationship with
pakistan at ameri american universities
if you reflect on your own university
for a moment and think about what was
studied
what was taught what was learned and
what was ignored i think it is fair to
say that
at universities united states of america
you might be able to take a course
on the political relationship between
the united states and latin america
you might have a professor who gives
lectures about the united states and its
evol
its involvement in wars in nicaragua
its involvement in wars in
colombia south america broadly speaking
you might have
some expertise in that universities here
in there in america
you would not be able to go into any
university united states of america and
find a department
devoted to and people studying and
people saying the next generation hey
it's really important that you
understand
america's political relationship with
pakistan this is
can't even say it's forgotten or ignored
expertise of this kind the united states
really
does not exist so that is how it was
possible for america to stumble into
this situation
when did america's war in afghanistan
end when did their partnership with
pakistan
and arguably it still isn't over right
like right now it's still
ongoing but at least under donald trump
you can say he announced and declared
the policy that trump was willing to
make peace with the taliban
he was willing to end america he
attempted
to end america's war in afghanistan it
has at least been decreased in scale
dramatically
and thus ipso facto
america's alliance with pakistan is
finally coming to an end many
years after it was discredited right now
again in terms of people starting to ask
questions with the alliance of pakistan
you remember this guy named osama bin
laden
where was he when the americans found
him when he was assassinated when he
when he died right what was the
involvement
of uh pakistani intelligence service
in locating osama bin laden there i mean
there were a lot of questions about what
pakistan's role
in uh the afghan conflict were that were
raised publicly and openly again without
having access to secret ci information
this started to be questioned at that
time so it is only
now that it becomes possible for the
united states to
really enter into a strategic
partnership with india
even though this idea of the
quadrilateral alliance has been on the
books
since about 2007. america was
totally dependent on pakistan
to feed american troops in afghanistan
just to
land and transport food to their bases
it was that
deep a daily dependency on
the government of pakistan all right and
now we can say that is over
or at least it is of a low enough
priority that america can take on this
new vision of its
foreign policy in asia i
was shocked when i heard this this
morning
um i was astonished
and i was astounded certainly most of us
assumed that joe biden was going to be
an indecisive
and ineffectual president who
you know just returned us
to the days of barack obama when bold
pro when bold proclamations were made on
every conceivable
political topic but we could all rest
assured
that nothing was really going to change
nothing was ever going to really happen
both domestically and in terms of
foreign policy you have to have some
sensitivity to the chinese perspective
on this issue what has been announced
today is absolutely china's
worst nightmare um this is a
global conspiracy of all of the
pro-democracy states
including countries they have a land
border with
they're immediately adjacent surrounding
and circling states
including numerous countries they have
you know an economic relationship with
that's crucial
to their normal daily functioning their
economy you want to look up the value of
trade
just between china and japan you know
and you know i think it's very telling
that wang yi
is on the phone to all these leaders in
europe because just within the last two
years the relationship between the
european union and china
has improved and improved it's become
closer and tighter
economically and uh politically
but once you have this quadrilateral
alliance in place
i've already asked you well what do you
think thailand is going to do
do you think thailand is now going to
become a pro-china
country it's going to say that they want
to support china and be in that circle
and be opposed to india australia
the united states so um
we now get into a broader question of
what's going to happen with the
relationship between china
and europe yes it's possible that europe
the eu
collectively and europe as a bunch of
individual nations
it's possible that the eu will become
more committed
to a pro-china position during 2020
europeans celebrated the opening of a
train line
that connected austria to china to
from vienna to cn a continuous train
line for the first time there are new
train lines being built there are new
highways being built
part of the belton road initiative the
opening of new harbors
in both greece and italy
that connect china to europe through
trade europe and china have gotten
cozy with one another just in the last
two years new trade agreements
and politically in every way europeans
feel
comfortable with the chinese in a way
that
australians don't right
australia is now in a position where
they regard even
chinese immigrants with extreme
suspicion and hostility
as being part of a communist party plot
to subvert
democracy in australia right now of
course there have been other flashpoints
we have the still ongoing question of
the political future of hong kong
some people care about this some people
don't it's it's an open question
um sorry but i began this by digression
by saying
you have to have some uh sensitivity
to china's position in this
one of the fundamental differences
between china
and india is that china has no interest
at all
in expanding its land borders or
expanding to become a
larger empire than it already is
whereas india actually is is interested
in exactly that
one of the reasons why india is a very
difficult strategic partner to have
is that india both in terms of the
the masses and the political elite they
are interested
in conquering pakistan
they are interested in either conquering
or at least
controlling countries like nepal
and sri lanka india has
a navy base that is due south of myanmar
in the andaman islands when joe biden
is talking about a democratic alliance
to control the indo-pacific ocean
to look at a map figure out how huge
that area is
of uh controlling the ocean going
basically all the way from
india to australia and then from
australia
to japan all right this is
a grandiose plan for world domination
that of course is greatly out of whack
with the humble
economic and military reality of what
india is
in the the 21st century joe biden also
announced today
that the world doesn't need china to
provide them with
vaccines that there would be a
partnership between japan
america and india with japanese money
and japanese technical expertise and
american
scientists and american pharmaceutical
corporations coming together
to mass manufacture the vaccines
in india not china to provide an
enormous number of vaccines for india
itself of course
and for poorer countries in the third
world directly competing with
what china and russia are already doing
as a goodwill gesture
providing vaccines to poverty-driven
countries around the world
well guess what it's not just vaccines
that can be made in india instead of
china
the cell phone you hold in your hands
right now is made in china
it could be made in india right the
computer i'm recording this at
is made in china but it could have been
made in india right
and nobody could be more keenly aware of
this
than the indians right so
you could be talking about a massive
economic shift
towards favoring manufacturing and cheap
labor
frankly being centered in india with
india as this kind of
trading and manufacturing partner
instead of china and very consciously
intentionally
to the exclusion of china that was
certainly something
that was talked about during the trump
presidency
but nobody really made it happen okay
in this video by saying um there's an
old feminist phrase
you know the personal is political
also stated as the political is personal
of course i think
nobody imagined just due to his demeanor
perhaps
nobody imagined that joe biden had been
sitting through the whole
of the obama presidency as the fiercest
critic
of everything obama was doing wrong
nobody thought he was chomping at the
bit
to change the world and do things his
way
nobody thought he was sitting there
watching
obama's pivot to asia policy
ineffectually rise and fall
watching obama's promises to withdraw
from afghanistan
fade away and become instead of
protracted commitments to
keep on conquering and occupying
afghanistan uh
nobody thought that joe biden
was sitting there looking at obama's
political alliance
with saudi arabia and thinking to
himself if he were in power he would be
doing everything 180 degrees different
whether or not biden was already
thinking about it back then
whether or not the machinations began
when he was vice president
it is obvious that contrary to the
expectation we had based on his demeanor
based on his debates with bernie sanders
joe biden
came into office with an unbelievably
hawkish and decisive policy to change
world politics irrevocably and forever
and i would remind you
he has promised that he will be in
office for four years only
not eight he's gonna do four years and
then his vice president
will run for election to take over so he
has come
in with a short span of time
to leave his mark on world history and
from day one
in office he declared loud and clear
the military alliance with saudi arabia
is over
america and saudi arabia are no longer
friends but enemies
and to my astonishment the alliance
between the united states and china
which dates back to richard dixon
and the strategic triangle the iron
triangle
that that is over
that the world will change forever and
with both of those the question is okay
well if those
if those people if your former allies
are now your enemies
who who are your new allies saudi arabia
responded to being cut off from american
military support
immediately by turning to china i i
looked it up because i wondered oh
will saudi arabia now pursue a
partnership with russia because just
militarily russians make very good
military hardware at a low price you
could start arming yourself with russian
tanks and russian aircraft no china and
saudi arabia has quite positive
uh political relations with china and
they
turn around immediately and they start
talking to china and they're in a
situation where they need to spend
millions and billions of dollars
immediately to buy military hardware
that they were expecting the united
states and now aren't getting and
they're they're in the middle of a
to them a desperately important war so i
mean this is a
good example of how this works okay well
you know if these people are no longer
an alliance
they've got to be in line to something
else you know the the cards get shuffled
the dominoes start to fall uh in a
different direction
so i mean yeah there was this question
this is just unfolded in the last few
weeks and months oh okay
well if this isn't just [ __ ]
if this isn't just something that's
going to evaporate like
barack obama's pivotal asia this is real
who is america's ally going to be
i mean it's not going to be iran you
know
and the answer shockingly enough seems
to be
the quadrilateral agreement that we are
going to have a new era
of the united states and again think
about how the other countries fit into
this
if the united states is entering into a
new partnership
with india what do you think england is
going to do what do you think thailand
is going to do
there are a lot of other countries that
are going to fall into place whoever is
leader of the philippines now or
five years from now what do you think
the philippines is gonna do right all
the other dominoes
start to fall everything starts to stack
up once you have this
this powerful alliance in place so it's
much more than a quadrilateral alliance
it becomes a worldwide
anti-china conspiracy china's worst
nightmare
for all these years but i have to say
you know
[Music]
india is a very hard ally
to have it's a relationship that's going
to be
very very hard to keep it's
very hard to say and i know i know
americans don't care about this
you know it's very hard to say
what the reaction is going to be from
pakistan
what the impacts are going to be in
afghanistan what the impacts are going
to be in
in central asia and
it is true that since world war ii india
has had
relatively few conflicts
with its neighbors right they just had a
conflict with china
you all remember that if you look it up
there was a time when india invaded sri
lanka when they deployed the military
in an intervention in sri lanka there's
a tiny country
you may not know about called bhutan you
know there was india's invasion of goa
goa goa goa used to be a separate
country kind of like hong kong
was separate from china um there has
always been this
potential for a much more bellicose
and expansionist india and india is
certainly committed to ruling
a very large part of the world's oceans
as is indicated by their naval presence
at port blair um the the long arm
of the indian empire heading out through
the the andaman islands
so india has been a very
unappealing political partnership to
have
at least since september 11th uh
2001 and it may prove to be
a very difficult partnership to continue
with
the japanese companies that are now
so deeply embedded in the chinese
economy
whether they manufacture cars or
cardboard boxes do you think those same
corporations
and those same men can literally
relocate to india
many of them have experience not just
manufacturing china but also with
malaysia also with vietnam
not going to get into the whole economic
case japan since world war ii
so-called what was it the flying eagle
formation no the flying
flying goose formation there's this
whole economic
and political strategy that that um that
japan had
and ultimately the leaders of these
zaibatsu these big
corporations they they in many ways
created you know the car manufacturing
industry that now exists
in china they created many of the most
important
industries in china have have roots in
uh japanese
partnerships okay um is that kind of
partnership
possible between the japanese
and the indians we're gonna find out
but the answer may be no it may be you
just
can't do you cannot make again in
india what you already created in
shanghai it may not be possible
apple computer and all of the
corporations in
silicon valley can they do again in
india
what they already did in china can they
relocate in some cases factories and
headquarters
can they do that again
we're going to find out maybe right
but maybe the answer is no um
it's certainly easy to think of ways in
which
the price of alienating china
could just be too high it could be too
high if there's this america it could be
too high for australia
and for japan it could be that after a
few years
of trying to do politics the joe biden
way because he's only got four years in
office
that the whole world goes back to doing
what barack obama did
and in some namby pamby uh
you know fence mending manner
goes back to trying to pursue the kind
of utterly paradoxical alliance with
china
that was invented by richard nixon